Welcome back all. So we're
just gonna go ahead
and continue with
loops, let me just go
ahead and switch my
notes to the other
screen, generally what you just
saw now this is switching between
screens one another when you pop this
just gotta bursts
into all the windows
that are currently
open on this desktop
I only have one and
on the other I have
like 10 million of them open.
So anyway
sometimes in regard to the loops I do
believe that I haven't written now this is
a while loop, sorry so
anyway sometimes it
is necessary for the
loop to executes at
least once, regardless
of the condition
and that is why we
need the do while loop
which is fairly similar to the while loop
let me just enlarge
it for you a little
bit, for example say
we want our program to
prompt the user to enter a positive
number if the User does not enter a
positive number we
want to prompt the
user to enter it
again and again and
again and again until
the user actually
enters a positive
number once the user
enters a positive number, the program
output it's the program will outputted
square value but in general the loop
will terminate as well so it will no
longer be prompting
the user to enter a
number, so how would
we achieved this? so
we want, we need this prompts to
happen at least once and if there is a
wrong input we wanted to repeat itself
but no matter what we want this problem
to happen at least once,
so to the user be
asked to enter a
positive number we want
you for this purpose
we will want to use
a loop that executes
at least once as I
said regardless of the
condition, why once?
well, because we
want to let the user
enter the number
regardless as I've stated,
so if the number
is positive, then
the loop stops
executing otherwise it
will repeat the process
until the user
gives a positive number
or until the user goes
mad and exit stick and
exit the program so
the pseudocode for this will look
something like this pk,
So you will have a do for the loop and then
you will have I don't know X will this
this is a stupid way of me
writing it now, but get
number the function of
some sort so we will be
placing some sort of a number into an X which will be a condition, so you
will notice that the condition will go
at the end so while and then you will
have the condition
down below the condition
will be that the
XP a positive number
so we will input
something into X and the
condition will be evaluated whether it
is a positive number or not so let's
write this in a way
that's more
understandable for you at
this point in time,
let's type it, this
will be there will be a block of code
here and here you will have condition
and one key difference
is that we will
need a semicolon at
the end so there is
a semicolon here remember that
regardless of whether we
place no semicolons
here or for any other
loops there is one
here, key difference.
So there's a block of code and then
there was a condition which is being
evaluated down below,
so let's go ahead
and see how can we
make this work, we can
delete the code and
we're not going to
need most of this, let's
just go ahead and
deleted all the way
up so we will need
in 10 that there will
be an integer that
will be declared here and immediately
down below we will jump into writing a
do while loop so let's
go ahead and type
in do and here we
will type in std,
colon colon, cout
enter natural number n.
std, colon colon,
cin, n. Excellent so
we have the first part
which basically prints out into the screen and it states
enter a natural number n.
so whatever that might
be just enter it
and then the user will be given away off
inputting that number n which needs to be
a natural number in order for this
loop to terminate and down below we will
enter a condition, the condition
might be somewhat counterintuitive but I
will explain in a moment
lesser or equal to
0, so the condition
is this one here it basically states
repeat while not
natural number, well
as long as the number
is not an actual
number, keep on repeating
when we get to
this point we are
certain that the user
entered a positive number. why?
well as long as the user keeps entering
something, keeps entering a zero or
a negative number, this condition will
evaluate to true because if you enter
minus one and is minus one is it that
less or equal to 0? it is less or equal
to 0 much it's actually
less than zero, if you
enter 0 is that less or equal to 0?
it's equal to
0, so this one will
continuously keep
on evaluating to true
and the loop will
continue repeating itself but say you
enter a number ten or 1,4,5 or something
like that, well in that case and will no
longer be lesser than or equal to 0
therefore, the condition will become false
and the loop will terminate and at that
point in time we are
certain absolutely
certain that the user
entered a positive
number whatever that might be
ok so double. Ok so
there are obviously
inherent flaws in
this you could within
cover double floating point or
stuff like that but it doesn't matter
I'm just giving you the general idea so
double as you sqrt
yeah because it's like integer n and I
don't know you might confuse
it by entering one
point something or
stuff like that,
it's just gonna get
the parts will just
get truncated in all
likelihood and you
won't get what you
expect I'm just confused
a little bit, anyway
that that part doesn't
really matter at
the time being, I just
want to explain the
do while loop and its
logic so we will
declare a variable double and we will
name it
SQRT for like square root and we will
initialize the value of the variable a
security underlined n to a std, colon colon, and we're going to use something
different this time, we're
going to use a function and that's gonna
be sqrt and we
should place n here,
so this function will return it
will actually compute the square root
and it will let down below we will print
it out, so this function
will return the
value, the equivalent
of this will be the
square root defense so this entire
statement, will be the actual
square root of n, which will be assigned to
this variable and it will be
printed out we will deal with the
functions and all of that but I just
wanted to throw it
in here a hint of
what is to come
so let's go ahead
std, cout,
and let's go ahead and type in
sqrt, and we'll do this, this
will look a little bit weird
but just take a look at it a
couple of times and you will be able to
figure it out, I assure you it's not so
difficult format, is not some complex format that I'm
doing here but I'll
explain it anyway, and
that's going to be std,
colon colon, endl.
Ok so, if the cout
is the last line
and you don't need
anything to be
printed in the same
line, it's not a bad
idea to put endl at
the end as it does
flushes the buffer, anyway we
have cout so it's just this is going to
be the text that is printed out onto the
screen and then we want to we have
number n which will be printed out
onto the screen, that is the number
that the user entered
and then we want
to close the parenthesis
so you will get
a printout on screen
something like this I
guess, well I guess
but exactly like this
sqrt some number n we'll be there
obviously an integer not the letter n and
you see this parenthesis is here is
right here and the first parenthesis is
here and the sqrt that
is this part it'll
should go like this equal
and then they will
be again some value here which will be
the square root of the number n which
we have given, so the
printout will be in
this format. Ok so
let's go ahead and run
this program and see what becomes of it
of course there is there is an error. Why
is there an error here?
Well, we didn't include the library which
would enable the
usage of these math
functions so let's
go ahead and do that
right now include
cmath, so see you
won't be able to
actually use the math
functions that are
available to you without including the
proper libraries, so the cmath
is included here because they
would like to use the function for
calculating the square root. Ok so let's
go ahead and try it again.
Excellent, so enter a natural number, let's say -2
it's gonna say again,
enter a natural number,
so 0, again so let's
enter I don't know,
let's enter number 9
and there you go, it
says square root of
nine equals to 3 so I
didn't include the space
down below when I
was giving the example
but hey what can
I do about it? So the
square root of 9
is indeed 3, if you
don't believe me
go ahead and check it
for yourself 3 times
3 it's actually 9,
so let's close it.
Let's run the program one more time
and let's go ahead and say that
it's not a very nice number that we are
going to enter something like 1111
so now it says that the
square root of 1111
is 33.3317, it will
calculate it different,
again if you don't believe me, take it a
calculator and or take it paper
and pencil or a pen if you prefer and then
go ahead and start calculating
or if you trust your
calculator in your cellphone,
feel free to do it in that
way as well. Anyway,
that will be it, in
terms of the do while
loop next up will jump
into for each loop.